---
layout: post
title: "Risk-Free Ruby on Rails App Redesign: A Step-by-Step Guide"
modified: 2023-05-13 15:06:43 +0200
description: "Learn how to give your Ruby on Rails app a fresh new look without risking your business. Our guide walks you through the process step-by-step to ensure a smooth and successful redesign."
tags: []
featured_post: false
toc: true
image: redesign-app.jpg
---

## Ruby on Rails app redesigning challenges

Redesigning a Ruby on Rails application is a common challenge for many companies. It may not be an issue for web apps with no live users. But it can be tricky for already launched businesses serving thousands of users per day and generating revenue.

In the latter scenario, the original application should continue functioning reliably while the new design gets validated and tested against the back-end. If the back-end is found to be incompatible, it must be adapted to fit the new design without breaking the old functionality. Setting aside other technical and human resource challenges, overcoming these common challenges is essential when dealing with a Ruby on Rails application redesign.

In this article, we will share our approach to applying a new design to a Ruby on Rails application with tens of thousands of active daily users, as experienced with one of our clients.

## Why redesigning a Ruby on Rails app

There are several reasons why an app may consider implementing a new UI/UX design. Regardless of the motive, the ultimate goal is always the same - **to increase revenue**. If the app is already in production, any effort put into improving its design should result in higher revenue. If a redesign does not have a positive impact on revenue, it may be seen as an unnecessary expense.

Minimizing expenses is crucial for achieving success. This means that any actions taken to implement a new design should not result in downtime that could lead to losing clients and revenue.

In our case, the client already had mockups drawn. Our task was to turn it into the code and connect it with the existing back-end. Technically, we had to avoid downtimes and reduce development efforts.

## Different technical approaches of a Ruby on Rails app redesign

Nowadays, it's hard to imagine a web project that isn't responsive (doesn't look good in all browsers, including mobile ones) and doesn't have a mobile application. As a rule of thumb, modern web app design has a rich UI, with many elements located on one page, usually not connected to each other in any way.

To fulfill these requirements, adopting an architecture with a separate front-end/mobile app connected to the back-end via API is a recommended approach. Furthermore, to ensure seamless and easy-to-maintain communication between the front-end and back-end, we prefer utilizing **GraphQL**.

Usually, Ruby On Rails applications follow a bit different approach when front-end code lives alongside the back-end one. When front-end code is generated by Ruby. While this implementation can fullfill all moder web app requiremens and is cheap in the beginning, it becomes hard in maintainance because of the tech overhead and mix of different technologies at one place (Ruby/JavaScript/HTML/CSS). Then it becomes too hard to find a developer that can understand and futher maintain this kind of system. While, you can find one, it will cost you a lot of money. It will be definately hard to build a diversified team with many developers that are equally good in all these technologies. For that reasons, we prefer separate back-end and front-end, where the different specialists are at their places. They do the job well and fast. Also, they are easily replaceable. Hence, there is no a bottleneck in some very specific specialist demand.

## Risk-free approach of a Ruby on Rails app redesign

## Our results of the Ruby on Rails app redesign

## Why our approach of Ruby on Rails app redesign is cheaper and less risky
